README.md, before:

# General

The MSI Keyboard Light Manager (MSIKLM) is an easy-to-use tool that allows to configure the
SteelSeries keyboards of MSI gaming notebooks with Linux / Unix in almost the same way as the
SteelSeries Engine can do using Windows.


# Installation & Requirements
## Manual Installation

I tried to keep the external dependencies to a minimum level, however there are some unavoidable
ones. These are:

 * GCC     - the C compiler
 * make    - the main build tool of the Linux world
 * LIBUSB  - MSIKLM needs to communicate with the keyboard, for this LIBUSB is required

Besides there are no others, no Qt, no Java, not even a C++ compiler is required. To install the
program on any Debian-based Linux distribution (for instance any Ubuntu-based one), there is an
installation script `install.sh` which can be run by opening the respective folder in a terminal
and typing

    ./install.sh

or if there are any problems you can try

    bash install.sh

as well which most certainly will work on most Debian-based distributions. This script will do the
following steps, if you do not want to use the installation script for some reason, you can use the
manual commands instead:

 * installation of the dependencies
   ```
   sudo apt install -y gcc make libhidapi-dev
   ```

 * compiling of MSIKLM
   ```
   make
   ```

 * clean up
   ```
   make clean
   ```

 * copy the built program to '/usr/local/bin/msiklm' and set its permissions
   ```
   sudo mv -fv msiklm /usr/local/bin/msiklm
   sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/msiklm
   ```

 * test the connection
   ```
   sudo msiklm test
   ```

Whenever MSIKLM is used, it should always be run as root because otherwise, the communication with
the keyboard is not possible, hence always use the sudo prefix (only `msiklm help` will work as
non-root).

## Distribution Package

Currently, there are also the following packages available to install MSIKLM:

 * Arch Linux via the AUR repository : https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/msiklm-git/

 * FreeBSD via the FreeBSD package repository : https://www.freshports.org/sysutils/msiklm/
   ```
   pkg install msiklm
   ```


# Usability

MSIKLM is a pure command line application, however its keyboard illumination control functionality
is encapsulated such that it could easily be integrated into a graphical user interface. However,
I neither wrote one for it nor I plan to do so. It is quite easy to use, and here is how to use
it. It always has to be called with at least one argument, i.e. running it without one will result
in an error. Here is an overview over the valid commands:

|command                                                       | valid arguments                                                                                | example                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
|sudo msiklm \<color\>                                         | either a predefined color or arbitrary RGB values ([R;G;B] or hex code), cf. explanation below | sudo msiklm green                    |
|sudo msiklm \<color1\>[,\<color2\>,\<color3\>,\<color4\>,...] | same as single color (important: no space between the colors!), cf. explanation below          | sudo msiklm green,blue,red           |
|sudo msiklm \<mode\>                                          | normal, gaming, breathe, demo, wave                                                            | sudo msiklm wave                     |
|sudo msiklm \<color\> \<brightness\>                          | color as above, brightness can be off, low, medium, high, rgb                                  | sudo msiklm green high               |
|sudo msiklm \<color\> \<mode\>                                | same as above                                                                                  | sudo msiklm green,blue,red wave      |
|sudo msiklm \<color\> \<brightness\> \<mode\>                 | same as above                                                                                  | sudo msiklm green,blue,red high wave |

The predefined supported colors are: none, off (equivalent to none), red, orange, yellow, green,
sky, blue, purple and white. The color configuration can also be performed in an more advanced way:
At most seven zones are supported (as long as supported by your device) and the respective colors
have to be supplied in the following order: left, middle, right, logo, front_left, front_right and
mouse. If there is only one supplied color, it is reused for the first three zones, the remaining
ones stay unchanged (i.e. green as single argument is equivalent to green,green,green). The colors
have to be separated with no spaces between the colors, simply add a comma for a new zone. The last
four colors are fully optional, i.e. they are set if and only if they are supplied. Consequently,
if you want to change the last color (mouse), you have to specify a color for all zones. Instead of
a predefined color, each color can alternatively be set in full RGB notation; the color values have
to be either enclosed by brackets and separated by semicolons, e.g. 'green' is equivalent to using
[0;255;0], or hex code notation can be used (0x000000 to 0xFFFFFF) where the respective values have
to be selected accordingly. It is possible to mix these explicit color definitions with predefined
ones, e.g. you can select a custom color for the left zone and use predefined for the others by
supplying [R;G;B],green,blue. Please note that it might be necessary to put quotation marks around
explicit color definitions, otherwise the argument might not be properly processed by the shell.

Further, the brightness argument can only be set to low, medium and high if _no_ custom rgb color is
given, while not supplying it is equivalent to supply 'rgb'. The reason for this is two-fold: First,
it makes little to no sense to explicitly define the color and to give a brightness as well, second
the brightness can be used to switch to a different way of communicating with the keyboard. Besides
technical details (cf. `set_color()` in `msiklm.c` for further details if you are interested in
them), it improves the compatibility with different devices, however the brightness has to be
explicitly given. For example `sudo msiklm green` will set the color green using its rgb values
(i.e. red=0, green=255, blue=0 or 0x00FF00 in hex code notation) while `sudo msiklm green high`
does basically the same but using a different way which might be supported by keyboards that do not
support full rgb color selection. As I do not have a bunch of different notebook available to test
them, I cannot say which command will work at which keyboard.

Additionally, there are three extra commands that might be useful if something does not work:

    msiklm help         -> shows the program's help
    sudo msiklm test    -> tests if a compatible keyboard is found
    sudo msiklm list    -> lists all found hid devices, this might be helpful if your keyboard is not detected by MSIKLM


# Device Support

Over the years, several keyboards were released out of which some are supported by msiklm while
some others are not. As multiple issues were reported regarding device support, also a few aspects
regarding device support are important. First, this project is a volunteer free-time / non-profit
project that is not officially supported by MSI or SteelSeries. I started this project as there
was no easy way to configure the keyboard whose command structure was known. Furthermore, two kinds
of command structures were generally available while some keyboards seem to support only one, while
some others might supported both. I have no official information whether certain keyboards are
supported or not. As a rule of thumb, the chances are pretty high that it is if `sudo mskilm test`
reports success. Otherwise, the chances are not that high. Still, the following things can be
tested:

- Run `sudo mskilm list` to list all USB devices.
- If your keyboard is found, copy vendor ID and device ID.
- Edit the file `msiklm.c` and replace the IDs in the line `hid_open(0x1770, 0xff00, 0);`,
  i.e. `0x1770` by your vendor ID and `0xff00` by your product ID, respectively.
- Recompile msiklm with your changes.
- Run `sudo mskilm test` again.

Now, your device should be detected. Still, this does not mean that it also supports the currently
implemented commands. I do not know whether it does, the only way to find out is to test on your
own, in particular on your own risk. However, I think the risk is rather low that a wrong command
can cause any damage to the keyboard. Presumably, at most a power-off might be required if
something is wrong with the command. If you want to test msiklm with your modification, run a
command of choice. Here, supplying and not supplying the intensity argument is worth testing as
this selects the command structure out of two possible options, as discussed before.

If this does not work with your keyboard, the only way of using it in combination with msiklm is
to identify the correct command structure. Most likely, this is possible by dumping and analyzing
the communication with the keyboard while it is controlled by the SteelSeries Engine.


# Autostart

An important additional feature is the optional autostart functionality since the keyboard will
reset itself to its default color configuration whenever you reboot it or resume from standby.
Hence, it is really useful to automatically reconfigure the keyboard to your configuration of
choice. To do this, there is an extra script called `autostart.sh` that can do this for you. This
script registers MSIKLM to the udev service (more precisely it registers the keyboard to the udev
service which calls MSIKLM as soon as the keyboard is detected) by creating a rule file:

    /etc/udev/rules.d/90-msiklm.rules

To create this file including your MSIKLM arguments of choice, run:

    ./autostart.sh <your arguments>

Try if everything works by first rebooting your system and then try a standby and wakeup. If
everything works, we are done here. If not, please report an issue. :-)

Finally, the autostart can be disabled by running

    ./autostart.sh --disable

which will disable the autostart by removing the rule file.


# Uninstallation

MSIKLM also comes with an uninstallation script uninstall.sh which will remove the program file
/usr/local/bin/msiklm as well as running ./autostart --disable, i.e. it disables the autostart.
If you want to use it, simply run:

    ./uninstall.sh


# Developer Information

The source code is split into three files:
- Main application (`main.c`) that converts the input
- Small library that contains the main features (`msiklm.h` and `msiklm.c`).
This provides a simple C API and hence allows an easy integration into different programs like maybe
a small graphical user interface.

Commit message:

Updated autostart script to require arguments and README.md to reflect new script usage. Change suggested by AtomicRobotMan0101.

README.md, after:

# General

The MSI Keyboard Light Manager (MSIKLM) is an easy-to-use tool that allows to configure the
SteelSeries keyboards of MSI gaming notebooks with Linux / Unix in almost the same way as the
SteelSeries Engine can do using Windows.


# Installation & Requirements
## Manual Installation

I tried to keep the external dependencies to a minimum level, however there are some unavoidable
ones. These are:

 * GCC     - the C compiler
 * make    - the main build tool of the Linux world
 * LIBUSB  - MSIKLM needs to communicate with the keyboard, for this LIBUSB is required

Besides there are no others, no Qt, no Java, not even a C++ compiler is required. To install the
program on any Debian-based Linux distribution (for instance any Ubuntu-based one), there is an
installation script `install.sh` which can be run by opening the respective folder in a terminal
and typing

    ./install.sh

or if there are any problems you can try

    bash install.sh

as well which most certainly will work on most Debian-based distributions. This script will do the
following steps, if you do not want to use the installation script for some reason, you can use the
manual commands instead:

 * installation of the dependencies
   ```
   sudo apt install -y gcc make libhidapi-dev
   ```

 * compiling of MSIKLM
   ```
   make
   ```

 * clean up
   ```
   make clean
   ```

 * copy the built program to '/usr/local/bin/msiklm' and set its permissions
   ```
   sudo mv -fv msiklm /usr/local/bin/msiklm
   sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/msiklm
   ```

 * test the connection
   ```
   sudo msiklm test
   ```

Whenever MSIKLM is used, it should always be run as root because otherwise, the communication with
the keyboard is not possible, hence always use the sudo prefix (only `msiklm help` will work as
non-root).

## Distribution Package

Currently, there are also the following packages available to install MSIKLM:

 * Arch Linux via the AUR repository : https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/msiklm-git/

 * FreeBSD via the FreeBSD package repository : https://www.freshports.org/sysutils/msiklm/
   ```
   pkg install msiklm
   ```


# Usability

MSIKLM is a pure command line application, however its keyboard illumination control functionality
is encapsulated such that it could easily be integrated into a graphical user interface. However,
I neither wrote one for it nor I plan to do so. It is quite easy to use, and here is how to use
it. It always has to be called with at least one argument, i.e. running it without one will result
in an error. Here is an overview over the valid commands:

|command                                                       | valid arguments                                                                                | example                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
|sudo msiklm \<color\>                                         | either a predefined color or arbitrary RGB values ([R;G;B] or hex code), cf. explanation below | sudo msiklm green                    |
|sudo msiklm \<color1\>[,\<color2\>,\<color3\>,\<color4\>,...] | same as single color (important: no space between the colors!), cf. explanation below          | sudo msiklm green,blue,red           |
|sudo msiklm \<mode\>                                          | normal, gaming, breathe, demo, wave                                                            | sudo msiklm wave                     |
|sudo msiklm \<color\> \<brightness\>                          | color as above, brightness can be off, low, medium, high, rgb                                  | sudo msiklm green high               |
|sudo msiklm \<color\> \<mode\>                                | same as above                                                                                  | sudo msiklm green,blue,red wave      |
|sudo msiklm \<color\> \<brightness\> \<mode\>                 | same as above                                                                                  | sudo msiklm green,blue,red high wave |

The predefined supported colors are: none, off (equivalent to none), red, orange, yellow, green,
sky, blue, purple and white. The color configuration can also be performed in an more advanced way:
At most seven zones are supported (as long as supported by your device) and the respective colors
have to be supplied in the following order: left, middle, right, logo, front_left, front_right and
mouse. If there is only one supplied color, it is reused for the first three zones, the remaining
ones stay unchanged (i.e. green as single argument is equivalent to green,green,green). The colors
have to be separated with no spaces between the colors, simply add a comma for a new zone. The last
four colors are fully optional, i.e. they are set if and only if they are supplied. Consequently,
if you want to change the last color (mouse), you have to specify a color for all zones. Instead of
a predefined color, each color can alternatively be set in full RGB notation; the color values have
to be either enclosed by brackets and separated by semicolons, e.g. 'green' is equivalent to using
[0;255;0], or hex code notation can be used (0x000000 to 0xFFFFFF) where the respective values have
to be selected accordingly. It is possible to mix these explicit color definitions with predefined
ones, e.g. you can select a custom color for the left zone and use predefined for the others by
supplying [R;G;B],green,blue. Please note that it might be necessary to put quotation marks around
explicit color definitions, otherwise the argument might not be properly processed by the shell.

Further, the brightness argument can only be set to low, medium and high if _no_ custom rgb color is
given, while not supplying it is equivalent to supply 'rgb'. The reason for this is two-fold: First,
it makes little to no sense to explicitly define the color and to give a brightness as well, second
the brightness can be used to switch to a different way of communicating with the keyboard. Besides
technical details (cf. `set_color()` in `msiklm.c` for further details if you are interested in
them), it improves the compatibility with different devices, however the brightness has to be
explicitly given. For example `sudo msiklm green` will set the color green using its rgb values
(i.e. red=0, green=255, blue=0 or 0x00FF00 in hex code notation) while `sudo msiklm green high`
does basically the same but using a different way which might be supported by keyboards that do not
support full rgb color selection. As I do not have a bunch of different notebook available to test
them, I cannot say which command will work at which keyboard.

Additionally, there are three extra commands that might be useful if something does not work:

    msiklm help         -> shows the program's help
    sudo msiklm test    -> tests if a compatible keyboard is found
    sudo msiklm list    -> lists all found hid devices, this might be helpful if your keyboard is not detected by MSIKLM


# Device Support

Over the years, several keyboards were released out of which some are supported by msiklm while
some others are not. As multiple issues were reported regarding device support, also a few aspects
regarding device support are important. First, this project is a volunteer free-time / non-profit
project that is not officially supported by MSI or SteelSeries. I started this project as there
was no easy way to configure the keyboard whose command structure was known. Furthermore, two kinds
of command structures were generally available while some keyboards seem to support only one, while
some others might supported both. I have no official information whether certain keyboards are
supported or not. As a rule of thumb, the chances are pretty high that it is if `sudo mskilm test`
reports success. Otherwise, the chances are not that high. Still, the following things can be
tested:

- Run `sudo mskilm list` to list all USB devices.
- If your keyboard is found, copy vendor ID and device ID.
- Edit the file `msiklm.c` and replace the IDs in the line `hid_open(0x1770, 0xff00, 0);`,
  i.e. `0x1770` by your vendor ID and `0xff00` by your product ID, respectively.
- Recompile msiklm with your changes.
- Run `sudo mskilm test` again.

Now, your device should be detected. Still, this does not mean that it also supports the currently
implemented commands. I do not know whether it does, the only way to find out is to test on your
own, in particular on your own risk. However, I think the risk is rather low that a wrong command
can cause any damage to the keyboard. Presumably, at most a power-off might be required if
something is wrong with the command. If you want to test msiklm with your modification, run a
command of choice. Here, supplying and not supplying the intensity argument is worth testing as
this selects the command structure out of two possible options, as discussed before.

If this does not work with your keyboard, the only way of using it in combination with msiklm is
to identify the correct command structure. Most likely, this is possible by dumping and analyzing
the communication with the keyboard while it is controlled by the SteelSeries Engine.


# Autostart

This script registers MSIKLM to the systemd service, ensuring that your keyboard configuration is
applied automatically at startup.

To set up autostart with your preferred MSIKLM arguments, run:

    sudo ./autostart <your arguments>

Try if everything works by first rebooting your system and then try a standby and wakeup. 

The autostart can be disabled by running

    sudo ./autostart_disable

which will disable the autostart by removing the systemd service.

*The change from udev to systemd was suggested by AtomicRobotMan0101 in this post: https://github.com/Gibtnix/MSIKLM/issues/54*


# Uninstallation

MSIKLM also comes with an uninstallation script uninstall.sh which will remove the program file
/usr/local/bin/msiklm as well as running ./autostart --disable, i.e. it disables the autostart.
If you want to use it, simply run:

    ./uninstall.sh


# Developer Information

The source code is split into three files:
- Main application (`main.c`) that converts the input
- Small library that contains the main features (`msiklm.h` and `msiklm.c`).
This provides a simple C API and hence allows an easy integration into different programs like maybe
a small graphical user interface.
